---
layout: page
title: From Design Inspiration to Co-curation 
tags: "#AIGC, #Co-creation, #VR, #Digital Exhibition. "
description: The Changing Role of Curatorial Practice in a Digital Generative AI Landscape for the Arts.
img: assets/img/project_imgs/FromDesignInspirationtoCo-curation/title.png
importance: 5
category: "HCI & HAI & AR/VR"
---


Here’s the project paper: 
- Zhang, J. \*, **Xiang, Y.** \* , Zhao, Y. \*, Jin, X., Sun, J., Fan, M., Tong, X., and LC, R. (2024). From Design Inspiration to Co-curation: The Changing Role of Curatorial Practice in a Digital Generative AI Landscape for the Arts. In *2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI)*. (Submitted, *Co-first authors). 


Curatorial practice contains diverse challenges of selecting, ideating, coordinating, and publicizing exhibited works. In the context of Generative AI (AIGC), they encounter solutions to old challenges while facing new ones. To examine how curators respond to their changing roles in the face of AIGC, we interviewed experienced curators and uncovered that while the use of AIGC in their practice can struggle with metaphors in their work, it can facilitate communication and enhance inspiration. To explore how may AIGC influence curatorial workflows, we undertook three case studies with curators for the digital exhibition process, and found that they applied AIGC in their curatorial workflow to varying degrees, from generating curatorial statement content to designing spaces, to even customizing artworks themselves. This work offers a toolkit for future curator-AIGC interaction, illustrates the changing of curation in adaptation to generative AI technologies and proposes AIGC optimization.


**RQ1: What are the curators' practices, challenges, and reflections on using AIGC for digital exhibitions?**

**RQ2: When curators conduct their work in practice for a digital exhibition, how does AIGC influence this day-to-day curatorial workflow?**

To address these research questions, we initiated our investigation by conducting interviews with ten curators. These discussions allowed us to understand the experiences, challenges, and reflections associated with the everyday use of AIGC tools in curatorial work. This was followed by a case investigation study to delve into how AIGC tools are utilized throughout the entire curatorial process. Specifically, three curators, under the guidance of our research team, engaged in curatorial activities using AIGC tools, culminating in the creation of a virtual exhibition on the VRchat platform.

<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-sm-8 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/project_imgs/FromDesignInspirationtoCo-curation/1.png" title="DUIIT image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Table 1. Demographic Information of Participants.
</div>


<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-sm-8 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/project_imgs/FromDesignInspirationtoCo-curation/2.png" title="DUIIT image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Figure 1. The result of C1’s Exhibition. The first figure is the appearance of the exhibition hall generated by the curator using the AIGC tool. The curator wants to use the traditional exhibition hall but wants the exhibition hall to be placed in the sky. The second and third figures are screenshots of the exhibition in VRChat.
</div>



<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-sm-8 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/project_imgs/FromDesignInspirationtoCo-curation/3.png" title="DUIIT image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Figure 2. The example of "imitated" artworks from C1. In order to reflect on the topic of "imitation", the curators chose several pairs of "imitated" artworks, such as The Starry Night by Vincent van Gogh and Berlin Starry Night by Slava Ostap.
</div>



<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-sm-8 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/project_imgs/FromDesignInspirationtoCo-curation/4.png" title="DUIIT image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Figure 3.  The result of C2’s Exhibition. The first figure is the appearance of the exhibition generated by the curator using the AIGC tool. The curator wants to set the exhibition in a sewer. The second figure is one of the artworks made by AIGC. The third figure is a screenshot of the exhibition in VRChat.
</div>



<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-sm-8 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/project_imgs/FromDesignInspirationtoCo-curation/5.png" title="DUIIT image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Figure 4. The short video clips of C2’s Exhibition.C2 uses AIGC tools to generate short videos to describe the environment and story background of the future city where the exhibition takes place.
</div>



<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-sm-8 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/project_imgs/FromDesignInspirationtoCo-curation/6.png" title="DUIIT image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Figure 5.  The result of C3’s Exhibition. The first figure is the appearance of the exhibition generated by the curator using the AIGC tool. The second figure is one of the artworks made by AIGC. The third figure is a screenshot of the exhibition in VRChat.
</div>



<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-sm-8 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/project_imgs/FromDesignInspirationtoCo-curation/7.png" title="DUIIT image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Figure 6. One of the Artworks. The first figure is the artwork made by AIGC, the second and third work is an existing artwork, which can be associated with the AI-generated artwork.
</div>











**Our research reveals that:** 
1) AIGC tools can help curators to enhance aesthetic and creative ability, acquire broad academic knowledge and communicate efficiently but struggling with metaphors and communication among multiple stakeholders. 
2) AIGC is just an auxiliary tool for curators but can open up new possibilities for them to find inspiration. 
3) AIGC contributes to curatorial efficiency and believe that it can enhance the experience of  curators working throughout the curatorial process. 

Building on top of our findings, we have synthesized a set of design guidelines aimed at providing curators with insights into the effective integration of AIGC tools into the curatorial process. We also discuss evolving curatorial methodologies and roles in the AIGC context and propose AIGC optimization.

To our knowledge, this is the first exploration of what curators are doing or can do to overcome challenges posed by changing workflows caused by AIGC. 

**In summary, we make the following contributions:**

1) Demonstrate the utilization of AIGC tools by curators in their curatorial practices, elucidating the associated challenges and reflection; 

2) Deduce the potential impact of AIGC on the curatorial workflows; 

3) Offer guidance on enhancing the effective integration of AIGC tools into the curatorial process by curators; 

4) Engage in a discussion on the design principles for AIGC tools, to optimize their assistance in facilitating the completion of curatorial tasks by curators.

